# ThirstyFLOPS: Water Footprint Modeling and Analysis Toward Sustainable HPC Systems (SC'25)

Paper is published at 2025 ACM/IEEE The International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage, and Analysis (SC'25)
Link to paper: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3712285.3759804

## Description
High-performance computing (HPC) systems are becoming increasingly water-intensive due to their reliance on water-based cooling and the energy used in power generation. However, the water footprint of HPC remains relatively underexplored—especially in contrast to the growing focus on carbon emissions. In this paper, we present a comprehensive water footprint analysis for HPC systems. Our approach incorporates region-specific metrics, including Water Usage Effectiveness (WUE), Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE), and Energy Water Factor (EWF), to quantify water consumption using real-world data. By evaluating four representative HPC systems, Marconi, Fugaku, Polaris, and Frontier, we provide implications for HPC system planning and management. Furthermore, we explore the impact of regional water scarcity and nuclear-based energy strategies on HPC sustainability. Our findings aim to advance the development of wateraware, environmentally responsible computing infrastructures.
## Artifact Dependencies and Setup Process
There is no hardware requirement. Our evaluation was conducted on a 5-core CPU with 16 GB. Python version 3.8.11 and Jupyter are used, and the required packages are listed in `requirements.txt`. Install all required packages using:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
Make sure your Jupyter is linked with the correct Python environment. After installation, you also need to process the data. The HPC energy data can be collected from: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15271526

```bash
python ./ThirstyFLOPS/data_process.py 
```
The utilization data and the energy data are generated under folder `./HPC_util_power`. Then, you are ready to reproduce the results.

## Reproducing the Results

1. **Background Introduction**  
   Figure 1 motivates our study by presenting the carbon intensity, water scarcity, and HPC power usage across the U.S. You can run the experiment using the provided Jupyter Notebook. The generated figure will be saved in the `./figures` directory.

2. **Embodied and Operational Water Footprint**  
   Figures 3 and 4 present the embodied and operational water footprints of HPC systems, analyzed using ThirstyFLOPS. These figures can be generated by executing the corresponding Jupyter Notebook. Output files will be saved in the `./figures` directory.

3. **WUE and EWIF Analysis**  
   Water Usage Effectiveness (WUE) and Energy Water Intensity Factor (EWIF) are two key metrics influencing operational water footprint—both direct and indirect. Figure 6 illustrates the variations of WUE and EWIF, while Figure 7 visualizes the relationship between direct and indirect water usage. These can be reproduced using the Jupyter Notebook; outputs are saved in `./figures`.

4. **Water Scarcity Index (WSI)**  
   Figure 8 shows how WSI affects the ranking of water footprints, and Figure 10 presents county-level WSI data. Both can be generated by running the Jupyter Notebook and will be saved in the `./figures` folder.

5. **HPC System Case Studies**  
   Figure 11 evaluates the energy and water footprints of four supercomputers using ThirstyFLOPS. Run the Jupyter Notebook to generate the figure in `./figures`.

6. **Carbon vs. Water Footprint**  
   Figure 12 illustrates the trade-off between carbon and water footprints. This figure demonstrates their competing nature and will be generated under the `./figures` directory.

7. **Opportunities for Water Savings**  
   Figure 13 shows how delaying the start time of HPC jobs can reduce water consumption, as revealed by ThirstyFLOPS. The figure will be saved in `./figures`.

8. **Nuclear Power in HPC**  
   Figure 14 explores the potential water impact of powering HPC systems with nuclear energy. Run the relevant notebook to generate this figure in the `./figures` directory.

---

## How to Use ThirstyFLOPS

Refer to Table 2 in the paper, which summarizes the input parameters and their corresponding data sources used in our modeling tool. **ThirstyFLOPS** is the first comprehensive tool designed for HPC practitioners, covering all relevant parameters, their data references, and expected value ranges.

> **Note:** Reproducing the results does *not* require directly using the ThirstyFLOPS CLI tool. All analyses can be executed via the provided Jupyter Notebooks.

Here is an example:
```bash
python ./ThirstyFLOPS/thirstyflops.py \
  --cpu_number 2 \
  --cpu_location TSMC \
  --cpu_node 7 \
  --cpu_yield_rate 0.85 \
  --cpu_die_area_mm2 500 \
  --cpu_memory_gb 64 \
  --cpu_ic_water_liters 25 \
  --gpu_number 2 \
  --gpu_location TSMC \
  --gpu_node 5 \
  --gpu_yield_rate 0.80 \
  --gpu_die_area_mm2 800 \
  --gpu_memory_gb 80 \
  --gpu_ic_water_liters 40 \
  --dram_size_gb 128 \
  --ssd_size_gb 1024 \
  --hdd_size_gb 2048 \
  --wue 1.5 \
  --energy 100000 \
  --pue 1.3 \
  --ewf 1.2 \
  --wsi_direct 0.25 \
  --wsi_indirect 0.4
```

## Citation

If you use this code, please cite the paper:


```bibtex
@inproceedings{10.1145/3712285.3759804,
author = {Jiang, Yankai and Kanakagiri, Raghavendra and Basu Roy, Rohan and Tiwari, Devesh},
title = {ThirstyFLOPS: Water Footprint Modeling and Analysis Toward Sustainable HPC Systems},
year = {2025},
isbn = {9798400714665},
publisher = {Association for Computing Machinery},
address = {New York, NY, USA},
url = {https://doi.org/10.1145/3712285.3759804},
doi = {10.1145/3712285.3759804},
pages = {855–869},
numpages = {15},
keywords = {High Performance Computing, Sustainability, Water Footprint},
series = {SC '25}
}
```

## License

This project is released under the MIT License.